that was DW Washington bureau chief enus
Paul there we're still in Washington and
Benjamin Netanyahu has promised to
continue the war in Gaza and called on
the United States to Stand United with
Israel addressing a joint session of
Congress the Israeli Prime Minister
defended his country's conduct of the
war as protesters gathered outside to
demand an end to the conflict Mr
Netanyahu was met with standing ovations
for most from most of the chamber but
despite boycotts from some democratic
lawmakers and he blamed Iran and its
proxies of forting instability across
the Middle East and said he would do
whatever it takes to protect
Israel ladies and gentlemen that Victory
is in sight Israel's defeat of Hamas
will be a powerful blow to Iran's AIS of
Terror another part of that AIS hisbah
attacked Israel on October 8th a day
after the Hamas attack it has launched
thousands of missiles and drones against
us 80,000 of our citizens in Northern
Israel evacuated their homes becoming
effectively refugees in their own land
we are committed to returning them home
we prefer to achieve this
diplomatically but let me be clear
Israel will do whatever it must do to
restore security to our northern border
and return our people safely to their
homes all right let's bring in Gerald
feein a former US ambassador to Yemen
who also served as a diplomat in several
other countries in the region he's with
the Middle East Institute in Washington
DC and joins us from Philadelphia
welcome to you I want to start by asking
what do you think we learned from the
Israeli Prime Minister speech today
it's a pleasure to be with you uh this
evening uh and and frankly uh not
terribly much I think that uh the speech
was mostly uh uh the uh prime minister's
attempt to defend uh what Israel has
done over these past nine almost 10
months uh to uh not really give uh any
indication of in uh of introspection of
any kind of review of the Plus or
minuses of Israeli action certainly no
vision of where uh he wants to go after
the Gaza conflict uh the one thing he
was much more careful uh this time than
he was in
2015 uh when he spoke to the Congress
about the Obama administration's efforts
to achieve a nuclear agreement with Iran
uh this time he was much more careful to
balance uh between uh the Republicans
and the Democrats between president
Biden and president Trump uh and to try
to avoid uh getting embroiled in the US
Presidential politics but otherwise it
was a very aggressive speech it was a
very uncompromising speech it was not
one that will give people who are
concerned about Israel's actions a very
much reason for
optimism Netanyahu called for a de
demilitarized and deradicalized post-war
Gaza but he didn't say how this would be
achieved do you see much of a workable
day after strategy
here well certainly not in terms of what
uh of what uh prime minister Netanyahu
talked about today uh the idea that
Israeli military op operations are going
to somehow lead to a
deradicalized Gaza I think even most
Israelis most senior Israeli military
officials intelligence official offal
understand that he's never going to
achieve that goal in fact I think that
on on the on the current trajectory uh
what we should be anticipating is a much
more radical Gaza a much more embittered
and uh and determined to strike at
Israel Gaza
population the counts vary but at least
60 Democrat lawmakers boycotted
netanyahu's speech one reporter said it
was as as many as 130 absent does this
constitute a Democratic party turning
away from
Israel I don't know that they're turning
away from Israel and I think that it's
important that we distinguish between
support for the state of Israel which I
believe is still very strong uh on on a
bipartisan basis uh and support for
Israel under the current leadership
under Benjamin Netanyahu and this very
extreme right-wing government that he's
got in power uh and uh what they're
doing in Gaza right now so I think uh I
think that if uh if Netanyahu leaves the
scene if we have a government in Israel
uh that is more positive more forward
leaning more uh responsive uh to the
calls not only of Washington but the
entire International Community uh you
will see the support for Israel there
but under current circumstances and
again you know the attack that he laid
that he led uh against uh demonstrators
against people many of whom are sincere
legitimate concerned about the situation
in Gaza and basically calling anyone who
disagrees with him Pro Hamas or an
Iranian useful idiot is not something
that's going to be inclined to
strengthen his support among uh
concerned
parties well let's have a look at that
vision and other parts of that speech
with Aaron David Miller who is a senior
fellow at the carnegi Endowment for
International Peace he focuses on US
foreign policy in the Middle East
welcome to DW uh this seems to be BB at
his oratorial best let's start with that
vision of the day after what did you
make of
it I mean I think it is his vision but
if you were looking for nuance and
creativity you certainly weren't going
to find it there the reality is that
right now gaza's future is pretty Grand
in large part because of two or three
realities one of which the Prime
Minister I think reflected accurate
number one Hamas is going to survive as
an
Insurgency uh it may not be able to
control Gaza but it will through
cooptation and intimidation be able to
influence significantly the PO the
politics of who or what actually governs
there second the idea of a Palestinian
Administration uh technocratic
government composed of local gazit the
Prime Minister didn't rule out
Palestinian Authority
participation but he didn't endorse it
um either and that's a second issue is
there a Palestinian governing structure
that the Israelis would accept right now
that can affect govern Gaza and also
maintain uh basic law functions of Law
and Order and three he rightly I think
um made it unmistakably clear that
without some successor security AR
architecture the Israelis are going to
uh have the capacity and he insisted on
the right to basically deal with Hamas
or Palestine Islamic Jihad so I I think
in large part he he has failed in the
sense that he's not willing to even
Explore what I would consider to be a
serious day after strategy but even if
he were willing to do that
I think it would be extremely difficult
under these circumstances to create it
so from what you've said it sounds like
whatever before we even get to the day
after the days leading up to the day
after and and indeed Beyond it just
sounds like an ongoing mess mess
mess I mean I I I don't I don't want to
rule out the possibility and I think
there is a significant chance that by
mid August
you could actually see assuming Mr netan
and Hamas agreed to um a endorsement of
the three phase three stages Israeli
plan which the president of the United
States articulated on May 31st and then
in scon the UN Security Council res I
think there's a reasonable chance given
the fact that both the Israeli Defense
Forces and Hamas for any number of
reasons uh need a pause that you could
actually see the first phase of that
agreement implemented a limited exchange
of
hostages uh for a six weeks ceasefire if
you could get six weeks of quiet in Gaza
you might be able to build on that to
move into phases two or three but right
now I don't see that one note that's
important to keep keep in mind on on
July
28th the Israeli conet goes into recess
it will not resume until two weeks weeks
roughly two weeks before our elections
during that time it is almost impossible
for any member of the coalition to bring
about either a constructive voting no
confidence or to schedule new election
so if Mr netan were inclined pressured
by the IDF and the need to return
hostages to basically sign on to that
deal he could probably get away with it
right with respect to the more radical
extremist members of his Coalition okay
thanks for that despite the constant
Applause that we saw during that 50 odd
minute speech and the standing ovations
it's clear that Mr Netanyahu doesn't
have unequivocal bipartisan support in
Congress how much though do you think
that speech will have shifted the
needle I think that what this visit
reflects and what this speech
reflects is that there is a serious frin
if not deterioration of bipartisan
support for Israel by one count uh only
a 100 of the 212 house Democratic
members showed up and roughly
27 of the 51 Democratic senators and in
an amazing amazing way Israel has now
become a highly partisan issue the
Republican party is the Israel can do no
wrong part and the Democratic party is
dived into progressives who want to
impose serious costs on Israel for their
activities and actions and more modern
mainstream Democrats you you uh showed
one Chris Van Holland who along with
Chris Murphy and um Chris Coons
basically called for significant
restrictions on US military assistance
in Israel so I think that's the key
issue the key takeaway from this visit
is not what it's going to achieve it's
what it reflect flex and the absence of
bipartisanship is I think a extremely
worrisome Factor both for making
significant policy for any
Administration uh and for the health and
well-being of a US Israel relationship
that's based on reciprocity and respect
for Mutual interests and so if we look
ahead to next year and a new
Administration do you think it is simple
as president Trump will um will have
will have Israel's back as it were
whereas a a president uh Harris will
have to do a much more complicated
dance I think the latter case you I
think you you hit it correctly and
punative president Harris will still I
think she's a moderate mainstream
Democrat with moderate mainstream views
although I suggested earlier that there
is an inner comma Harris which I think
uh is very angry and frustrated uh and
much more empathetic with respect to
Palestinian
suffering uh and the need to find a
solution to the Israeli Palestinian
conflict based on meeting the mutual
needs and requirements of both
parties uh it's not as the Prime
Minister wanted to portray a morality
play between good versus evil that may
be the case with Hamas but it's not the
case with the vast majority of
Palestinians so I think there might be a
significant um possibility or effort on
the part of a comma Harris
Administration and a change of
leadership in Israel that is absolutely
essential if you're going to get
anything done here and I think uh it
would also help uh in the
bipartisanship category if you got an
Israeli Prime Minister who wasn't
fighting the United States at every
twist and turn
who wasn't committed or acquiescing in
his radical ministers efforts to Annex
the West Bank and everything but name
and who sought to be more creative with
respect to what a better future for
postconflict Gaza could actually uh
could actually look like okay now when's
this big political TV event though won't
be this speech but President Biden's
first overal office uh address since
dropping out of the election race does
that leave only Israel as the audience
for Mr netanyahu's
speech I think the Republican party was
and there uh again the Israel can no go
no wrong party and I work for Republican
and democ Democratic administrations and
voted for republicans and Democrats this
not a partisan comment it's just a
reflection of the reality it may well be
Phil that the most important piece of Mr
Nintendo's visit it's not the meeting
with Biden not the meeting with Comm
Harris not even the speech before
Congress but the meeting he's going to
have what I call the Neto pilgrimage
down to Mara Lago where he will try to
mend his rather Fray
relationship with the former president
he's identified he Benjamin netan his
politics his party with the Republicans
that's his clear preference and frankly
if he could vote in our elections you
know who he'd be voting for well let's
pick through this that speech with DW
reporter Stefan Simons in Washington DC
and our middle Easter analyst shaie rzan
is here with me welcome both let's start
with you shy main takeaways then from
this this barnstorming speech in the US
Congress no doubt detan knows his craft
he's master in Communications he know
American audiences you know American
politics through and through but at the
same time it's very low in substance
very very little new things we can take
out of it he stuck to the main talking
points we've been hearing him in his in
his administration uh talking about in
the last uh months uh his main goals
were to defend Israeli conduct uh since
October 7th I think he did it quite
successfully he wanted to shift the
focus you know from what Israel is doing
to what's being done to Israel
portraying Israel as a victim of a
bigger uh you know scheme orchestrated
by Iran and of course the third one to
align Israel with the us sharing the
same values sharing the same struggle
and I think in that point it was very
effective but not very much new subance
that we've seen there other than that
okay um Stephan Simons in in Washington
so a rapturous reception uh from uh the
the gathered lawmakers lots of standing
ovations but some boycotts as well from
Democrats yeah about 50 uh reportedly 50
Democrats have were a no-show for to
this address by Benjamin nanyu and you
know um Republicans all showed up uh but
those 50 democrats for various reasons
chose not to be in the room and uh not
to show up for this address um why is
that well you know we are in a election
campaign here we're not only in November
uh voting for or electing a new
president but the ticket goes down the
aisle meaning there are Senators to be
elected there are of Representatives
being reelected etc etc so there's a lot
of un stake and a lot of Democrats are
they can't afford ignoring their
constituencies and how the feeling and
what the sentiment regarding Benjamin
Nan and the conduct of the Israeli
military in Gaza is so with that being
said 50 of them up to 50 of them uh
didn't show up okay and Mr Netanyahu
talked about the crowds gathered outside
the building to protest we will hear
from them and then we'll come back to
you Stefan
Simons Iran is funding the anti-israel
protests that are going on right now
outside this building not that many but
they're there and throughout the
city well I have a message for these
protesters when the tyrants of tan who
hang gays from cranes and murder women
for not covering their hair are praising
promoting and funding you you have
officially become Iran's useful idiots
well Stefan you spent some time amongst
those useful idiots who was Mr Nan's
characterization of them um at all
accurate well it's certainly a
simplification and Benjamin Nan knows
that of course but I mean you know it
serves the purpose and it served the
speech no uh it's a little bit more
complicated than that I'm not saying
that there is no Iranian influence or
maybe money going into specific groups
which will or who do show up uh you know
that's possible but that is a very very
diverse crowd and it's not just a few
it's a few thousand and you know they
managed to shut down Constitution Avenue
so that's not nothing um there is money
involved uh we could see this because
they were fairly uh well organized uh
there was Billboards and uh a stage with
with pa uh so speeches could be held and
so on but it is a very diverse group
group of different groups with different
agendas with different backgrounds and
you know what also there protesting
against benjaman and against the speech
and against the war in Gaza are some
families hostage families who are
desperate of getting their loved ones
back and who are asking Benjamin
Netanyahu to do more to maybe really
consider a US proposed and negotiated
ceasefire or even peace agreement so
it's a little bit more complicated than
benj Benjamin netan wants to make make
um uh representatives and senators of
the Republican party and the Democrats
believe and the American public okay and
and shaie you you you criticize that the
speech as being a light on substance but
we did get a glimpse of something that
has been called for for some time and
that is a a glimpse of what what Mr
Netanyahu has in in uh in in mind for
the day after this war star ends well
interestingly enough that's true but
interestingly enough he doesn't talk
about how we get there he doesn't
mention the word fire at all throughout
the speech over 50 minutes of talk he
doesn't talk about end to the war how do
we make it to the day after only you
know the only thing he talks about is
the need for complete Victory it's the
same slogans we've been hearing him for
talking about for months without really
understanding what's his concrete plan
of getting there but once we are there
that is true thenan is for the first
time maybe uh playing you know featuring
his vision that will bring Gaza into
civil Administration run by Palestinians
he said we do not wish to settle in Gaza
but we will control it you know at the
beginning to make sure that there's no
defense or you know any security threats
to Israel he talks about the dire need
to demilitarize and deradicalize Gaza
giving also examples of Japan and
Germany from World War II of course very
different cases and comparisons in
history but again very light on how to
get there who would be those people in
those civil Administration you know who
would be those Palestinians that will be
volunteering to do that where would the
money for this come from if we're
talking about International alliances or
Regional alliances then the world and
Regional players want to see more from
netan and his government before they're
willing to step into this hot mess of of
Gaza needs and and more commitment from
Israel for a long-term Plan before being
willing to you know to step in so um a
lot of what we've been hearing so far
from Netanyahu the need to Der
radicalize Gaza but still very light on
how exactly it should be happening and a
word about the other audience that Mr
Netanyahu uh was addressing Beyond
Capitol Hill back home in Israel yeah
well that's definitely Net's main crowd
he I think he you know showing to
Israeli crowd the standing ofation the
popularity that he has among Americans
helping you know helps him in his mind
to retain his stature as a strong leader
of Israel something that was of course
completely shattered after the October
7th attack but you know there's
something symbolic in this day
specifically this is a day when the
Israeli Parliament is going on a very
long summer pause and netan when he
started when this session started
started shortly after the attack of
October 7th nobody thought netan will
manage to survive as Israel's primee
Minister through all this months and
we've seen him we've seen him survive
we've seen him gain more and more
popularity and support and we see also
tonight why you know when he is in his
element He knows how to Rally his base
and his base in Israel but also in this
case a lot of the Republican uh base
that is very much the supporters he also
been using a lot of biblical terms
referencing to the the evangelicals who
are a big crowd of supporters for
Israelis especially for his administ
ation throughout the years so this is
some ofat what we're seeing uh tonight
very well crafted and strategically uh
performed uh speech by n okay so um the
he due to meet um vice president uh
Harris at tomorrow he's also separately
meeting uh President Biden and then he's
going on to meet uh president former
president Trump what do you think these
meetings are likely to bring well if
we're honest these are actually the most
important parts of his visit the speech
might be you know something that he was
very much looking forward you know he
was talking about the historic you know
record that he's breaking being the only
leader to speak four times in front of
the joint Congress but the real deal
will happen in those meetings we we
expect Biden to put a lot of pressure on
Nano to try to cment the deal the
hostage deal something that we've been
seeing Nano quite reluctant in doing in
the last weeks we know for Biden it's
important as part of his legacy because
he knows that his uh you know his name
will forever be tied to the Gaza war and
he would wish to see that comes to an
end sooner rather than later so that's
one thing Harris interestingly which he
did not mention in his speech and did
not preside over this joint Congress
meeting which how she would usually do
you know she needs this meeting in a way
in order to help her build her stature
as an international leader potential
future leader of the US but at the same
time she doesn't want to you know she
wants to also be able to maintain some
distance from Nano because you know it's
very toxic and very uh uh you know very
uh controversial topic when it comes to
to her base in the Democratic uh party
so she's going to do the minimum but
still keep doing that and of course
we're trumping something completely
different Nan is banking on Trump to be
the support that he needs once if one
day in November he goes back to the
White House there there there have been
a lot of tensions between them in the
last years and they're hoping to restart
it again um in the upcoming Friday in
the meeting okay um final word to you uh
Stefan Simons in Washington that the
relationship between um Mr n who and
President Biden has been very brittle he
went to Great pains to thank him but how
is this going to how is this
relationship going to develop now with
Joe Biden not standing for um a second
term and effectively being a lame duck
over the next six months how does he get
leverag to push to press on this uh this
peace
deal yeah well absolutely that's right
on the money there uh Phil um you
Benjamin n will get an earful from
President Biden because the president
has nothing to worry about anymore he's
not going to go for another term CA
Harris is and uh sh just referred to
that a little bit um she is very aware
of that the youth vote in America and
the independent the independent uh
voters as well as female Suburban vote
they do not look very kindly on what's
going on in Gaza right now and Cala
Harris is protecting this President
Biden will tell him uh if she wins and
you don't do what we want you and ask
you to do right now then you will look
into um well a potentially dark hole in
terms of your relationships with us and
with a potential Harris Administration
Donald Trump completely different
scenario he's going to kiss the ring as
shy alluded to there is frictions uh
Benjamin Netanyahu dared to congratulate
President Biden for his election about
three and a half years ago and Donald
Trump has never forgotten that um
despite the fact that he brought the
embassy from um Tel aiv to Jerusalem so
there's a lot bit of hugging and
schmoozing going on on Friday then with
Donald Trump and that's the scenario
we're looking at for Benjamin Nan with
the White House and Donald Trump okay
thanks for that Stephan Simons in
Washington thank you so much and Shan
rzan is here with me thank you as well